the reaction between methane and chlorine this page gives you the facts and a simple, uncluttered mechanism for the free radical substitution reaction between methane and chlorine. if you want the mechanism explained to you in detail, there is a link at the bottom of the page. the facts if a mixture of methane and chlorine is exposed to a flame, it explodes - producing carbon and hydrogen chloride. this isnt a very useful reaction the reaction we are going to explore is a more gentle one between methane and chlorine in the presence of ultraviolet light - typically sunlight. this is a good example of a photochemical reaction - a reaction brought about by light. it is better to use the term photochemical and keep the word catalysis for reactions speeded up by actual substances rather than light. the organic product is chloromethane. one of the hydrogen atoms in the methane has been replaced by a chlorine atom, so this is a substitution reaction. however, the reaction doesnt stop there, and all the hydrogens in the methane can in turn be replaced by chlorine atoms. multiple substitution is dealt with on a separate page, and you will find a link to that at the bottom of this page. the mechanism the mechanism involves a chain reaction. during a chain reaction, for every reactive species you start off with, a new one is generated at the end - and this keeps the process going. species a useful word which is used in chemistry to mean any sort of particle you want it to mean. it covers molecules, ions, atoms, or (in this case) free radicals. the over-all process is known as free radical substitution, or as a free radical chain reaction. what is free radical substitution on your browser to return quickly to this page. chain initiation the chain is initiated (started) by uv light breaking a chlorine molecule into free radicals. chain propagation reactions these are the reactions which keep the chain going. chain termination reactions these are reactions which remove free radicals from the system without replacing them by new ones.