the nucleophilic substitution reactions between halogenoalkanes and cyanide ions this page gives you the facts and simple, uncluttered mechanisms for the nucleophilic substitution reactions between halogenoalkanes and cyanide ions (from, for example, potassium cyanide). if you want the mechanisms explained to you in detail, there is a link at the bottom of the page. important if you arent sure about the difference between primary, secondary and tertiary halogenoalkanes, it is essential that you follow this link before you go on. on your browser to return to this page. the facts if a halogenoalkane is heated under reflux with a solution of sodium or potassium cyanide in ethanol, the halogen is replaced by a -cn group and a nitrile is produced. heating under reflux means heating with a condenser placed vertically in the flask to prevent loss of volatile substances from the mixture. the solvent is important. if water is present you tend to get substitution by -oh instead of -cn. these react with the halogenoalkane. for example, using 1-bromopropane as a typical primary halogenoalkane you could write the full equation rather than the ionic one, but it slightly obscures whats going on the bromine (or other halogen) in the halogenoalkane is simply replaced by a -cn group - hence a substitution reaction. in this example, butanenitrile is formed. in this example, there are 4 carbons in the longest chain - hence butanenitrile. the mechanism here is the mechanism for the reaction involving bromoethane this is an example of nucleophilic substitution. because the mechanism involves collision between two species in the slow step (in this case, the only step) of the reaction, it is known as an sn2 reaction. sn2 by name, you can just call it nucleophilic substitution. if your examiners want you to show the transition state, draw the mechanism like this the facts the facts of the reaction are exactly the same as with primary halogenoalkanes. if the halogenoalkane is heated under reflux with a solution of sodium or potassium cyanide in ethanol, the halogen is replaced by -cn, and a nitrile is produced. for example or if you want the full equation rather than the ionic one the mechanism this mechanism involves an initial ionisation of the halogenoalkane followed by a very rapid attack by the cyanide ion on the carbocation (carbonium ion) formed this is again an example of nucleophilic substitution. this time the slow step of the reaction only involves one species - the halogenoalkane. it is known as an sn1 reaction. the facts the facts of the reaction are exactly the same as with primary or tertiary halogenoalkanes. the halogenoalkane is heated under reflux with a solution of sodium or potassium cyanide in ethanol. for example the mechanism secondary halogenoalkanes use both sn2 and sn1 mechanisms. for example, the sn2 mechanism is should you need it, the two stages of the sn1 mechanism are