electronegativity this page explains what electronegativity is, and how and why it varies around the periodic table. it looks at the way that electronegativity differences affect bond type and explains what is meant by polar bonds and polar molecules. if you are interested in electronegativity in an organic chemistry context, you will find a link at the bottom of this page. what is electronegativity definition electronegativity is a measure of the tendency of an atom to attract a bonding pair of electrons. the pauling scale is the most commonly used. fluorine (the most electronegative element) is assigned a value of 4.0, and values range down to caesium and francium which are the least electronegative at 0.7. what happens if two atoms of equal electronegativity bond together consider a bond between two atoms, a and b. each atom may be forming other bonds as well as the one shown - but these are irrelevant to the argument. if the atoms are equally electronegative, both have the same tendency to attract the bonding pair of electrons, and so it will be found on average half way between the two atoms. to get a bond like this, a and b would usually have to be the same atom. you will find this sort of bond in, for example, h2 or cl2 molecules. the electrons are actually in a molecular orbital, and are moving around all the time within that orbital. this sort of bond could be thought of as being a pure covalent bond - where the electrons are shared evenly between the two atoms. what happens if b is slightly more electronegative than a b will attract the electron pair rather more than a does. that means that the b end of the bond has more than its fair share of electron density and so becomes slightly negative. at the same time, the a end (rather short of electrons) becomes slightly positive. in the diagram, (read as delta) means slightly - so means slightly positive. defining polar bonds this is described as a polar bond. a polar bond is a covalent bond in which there is a separation of charge between one end and the other - in other words in which one end is slightly positive and the other slightly negative. examples include most covalent bonds. the hydrogen-chlorine bond in hcl or the hydrogen-oxygen bonds in water are typical. what happens if b is a lot more electronegative than a in this case, the electron pair is dragged right over to bs end of the bond. to all intents and purposes, a has lost control of its electron, and b has complete control over both electrons. ions have been formed. a spectrum of bonds the implication of all this is that there is no clear-cut division between covalent and ionic bonds. in a pure covalent bond, the electrons are held on average exactly half way between the atoms. in a polar bond, the electrons have been dragged slightly towards one end. how far does this dragging have to go before the bond counts as ionic there is no real answer to that. you normally think of sodium chloride as being a typically ionic solid, but even here the sodium hasnt completely lost control of its electron. because of the properties of sodium chloride, however, we tend to count it as if it were purely ionic. at alevel, examples will tend to avoid the grey areas - they will be obviously covalent or obviously ionic. you will, however, be expected to realise that those grey areas exist. lithium iodide, on the other hand, would be described as being ionic with some covalent character. in this case, the pair of electrons hasnt moved entirely over to the iodine end of the bond. lithium iodide, for example, dissolves in organic solvents like ethanol - not something which ionic substances normally do. summary no electronegativity difference between two atoms leads to a pure non-polar covalent bond. a small electronegativity difference leads to a polar covalent bond. a large electronegativity difference leads to an ionic bond. polar bonds and polar molecules in a simple molecule like hcl, if the bond is polar, so also is the whole molecule. what about more complicated molecules in ccl4, each bond is polar. dotted lines represent bonds going away from you into the screen or paper. wedged lines represent bonds coming out of the screen or paper towards you. the molecule as a whole, however, isnt polar - in the sense that it doesnt have an end (or a side) which is slightly negative and one which is slightly positive. the whole of the outside of the molecule is somewhat negative, but there is no overall separation of charge from top to bottom, or from left to right. by contrast, chcl3 is polar. the hydrogen at the top of the molecule is less electronegative than carbon and so is slightly positive. this means that the molecule now has a slightly positive top and a slightly negative bottom, and so is overall a polar molecule. a polar molecule will need to be lop-sided in some way. patterns of electronegativity in the periodic table the most electronegative element is fluorine. if you remember that fact, everything becomes easy, because electronegativity must always increase towards fluorine in the periodic table. historically this is because they were believed not to form bonds - and if they dont form bonds, they cant have an electronegativity value. even now that we know that some of them do form bonds, data sources still dont quote electronegativity values for them. trends in electronegativity across a period as you go across a period the electronegativity increases. the chart shows electronegativities from sodium to chlorine - you have to ignore argon. it doesnt have an electronegativity, because it doesnt form bonds. trends in electronegativity down a group as you go down a group, electronegativity decreases. (if it increases up to fluorine, it must decrease as you go down.) the chart shows the patterns of electronegativity in groups 1 and 7. explaining the patterns in electronegativity the attraction that a bonding pair of electrons feels for a particular nucleus depends on the number of protons in the nucleus the distance from the nucleus the amount of screening by inner electrons. the factors influencing ionisation energies are just the same as those influencing electronegativities. on your browser to return to this page. on your browser to return to this page. on your browser to return to this page. why does electronegativity increase across a period consider sodium at the beginning of period 3 and chlorine at the end (ignoring the noble gas, argon). think of sodium chloride as if it were covalently bonded. both sodium and chlorine have their bonding electrons in the 3-level. the electron pair is screened from both nuclei by the 1s, 2s and 2p electrons, but the chlorine nucleus has 6 more protons in it. it is no wonder the electron pair gets dragged so far towards the chlorine that ions are formed. electronegativity increases across a period because the number of charges on the nucleus increases. that attracts the bonding pair of electrons more strongly. why does electronegativity fall as you go down a group think of hydrogen fluoride and hydrogen chloride. the bonding pair is shielded from the fluorines nucleus only by the 1s2 electrons. in the chlorine case it is shielded by all the 1s22s22p6 electrons. in each case there is a net pull from the centre of the fluorine or chlorine of 7. but fluorine has the bonding pair in the 2-level rather than the 3-level as it is in chlorine. if it is closer to the nucleus, the attraction is greater. as you go down a group, electronegativity decreases because the bonding pair of electrons is increasingly distant from the attraction of the nucleus. diagonal relationships in the periodic table what is a diagonal relationship at the beginning of periods 2 and 3 of the periodic table, there are several cases where an element at the top of one group has some similarities with an element in the next group. three examples are shown in the diagram below. notice that the similarities occur in elements which are diagonal to each other - not side-by-side. for example, boron is a non-metal with some properties rather like silicon. unlike the rest of group 2, beryllium has some properties resembling aluminium. and lithium has some properties which differ from the other elements in group 1, and in some ways resembles magnesium. there is said to be a diagonal relationship between these elements. there are several reasons for this, but each depends on the way atomic properties like electronegativity vary around the periodic table. so we will have a quick look at this with regard to electronegativity - which is probably the simplest to explain. explaining the diagonal relationship with regard to electronegativity electronegativity increases across the periodic table. so, for example, the electronegativities of beryllium and boron are electronegativity falls as you go down the periodic table. so, for example, the electronegativities of boron and aluminium are so, comparing be and al, you find the values are (by chance) exactly the same. the increase from group 2 to group 3 is offset by the fall as you go down group 3 from boron to aluminium. something similar happens from lithium (1.0) to magnesium (1.2), and from boron (2.0) to silicon (1.8). in these cases, the electronegativities arent exactly the same, but are very close. similar electronegativities between the members of these diagonal pairs means that they are likely to form similar types of bonds, and that will affect their chemistry. you may well come across examples of this later on in your course.