an industrial alkylation of benzene this page gives you the facts and simple, uncluttered mechanisms for the electrophilic substitution reaction between benzene and alkenes in the presence of a mixture of aluminium chloride and hydrogen chloride as the catalyst. if you want these mechanisms explained to you in detail, there is a link at the bottom of the page. the process to produce ethylbenzene is currently asked for by the uk a level exam board aqa, and i am including it solely to satisfy their requirements. if you dont actually need to read this, dont the facts industrially, alkyl groups can be substituted into a benzene ring using a variant on friedel-crafts alkylation. one possibility is that instead of using a chloroalkane with an aluminium chloride catalyst, they use an alkene and a mixture of aluminium chloride and hydrogen chloride as the catalyst. this is a cheaper method because it saves having to make the chloroalkane first. friedel-crafts alkylation reaction before you go on. to put an ethyl group on the ring (to make ethylbenzene), benzene is treated with a mixture of ethene, hcl and aluminium chloride. or better the aluminium chloride and hcl arent written into these equations because they are acting as catalysts. if you wanted to include them, you could write alcl3 and hcl over the top of the arrow. the formation of the electrophile the electrophile is ch3ch2. it is formed by reaction between the ethene and the hcl - exactly as if you were beginning to add the hcl to the ethene. the chloride ion is immediately picked up by the aluminium chloride to form an alcl4- ion. that prevents the chloride ion from reacting with the ch3ch2 ion to form chloroethane. friedel-crafts alkylation reaction to give the product you want anyway. the electrophilic substitution mechanism stage one stage two the hydrogen is removed by the alcl4- ion which was formed at the same time as the ch3ch2 electrophile. the aluminium chloride and hydrogen chloride catalysts are re-generated in this second stage. the facts the problem with more complicated alkenes like propene is that you have to be careful about the structure of the product. in each case, you can only really be sure of that structure if you work through the mechanism first. for example, the propyl group becomes attached to the ring via its middle carbon atom - and not its end one. you still need a mixture of aluminium chloride and hydrogen chloride as catalysts. the formation of the electrophile when the propene reacts with the hcl, the hydrogen becomes attached to the end carbon atom. a secondary carbocation (carbonium ion) is formed because it is more stable than the primary one which would have been formed if the addition was the other way round. because the positive charge is on the centre carbon atom, that is the one which will become attached to the ring. the electrophilic substitution mechanism stage one stage two again, the hydrogen is removed by the alcl4- ion. the aluminium chloride and hydrogen chloride catalysts are re-generated in this second stage.